---
title: "MAT 143: Mathematical Analysis for Business and Economics"
collection: teaching
type: "Undergraduate course"
permalink: /teaching/2025-fall-mat143
venue: "Mathematics Department, Utica University"
date: 2025-08-15
---

Welcome to the home page of Dr. Xiao Xiao's Mathematical Analysis for Business and Economics course at Utica University. You can find all the information for this course on this page. Please check this page frequently for announcements and assignments.

## Important Links

 * [WebAssign](https://www.webassign.net)
 * [Desmos](http://www.desmos.com/calculator)
 * [PingPong](https://pingpong.hks.harvard.edu/group/437?assistant=1666)

## Important Dates

 * Add/Drop deadline: 8/29/25
 * Fall break: 10/13/25 - 10/14/25
 * Withdraw deadline: 11/3/25
 * Thanksgiving break: 11/26/25 - 11/28/25
 * SOOT: 11/28/25 - 12/5/25
 * Final exam: 12/8/25 - 12/12/25

## Instructor Information

 * Instructor: Prof. Xiao Xiao
 * Email: xixiao@utica.edu
 * Office: White Hall 255
 * Office hour: Monday and Wednesday 12:30-2pm or by appointment.

## Homework 
 
 * 9/1/25
   * Start Section 1.2 homework in WebAssign.
   * Complete the rest of the Section 1.2 worksheet as much as you can.
   * Preview [Section 1.3](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/5upkqa7lyk8xz0rzuclup/MAT_143_Section_1_3.pdf?rlkey=6v9a1lkng9ypelrnwv398j4ts&dl=0).
   * Quiz 1 covers Goal 1, 2.

 * 8/29/25
   * Complete Section 1.1 homework in WebAssign.
   * Preview [Section 1.2](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/0z8dtjrvf33mk43l6ve7s/MAT_143_Section_1_2.pdf?rlkey=51v5ygc020sxsqeb9slak8mux&dl=0) worksheet.

 * 8/27/25
   * Complete Problem 2 and 3 in [Section 1.1](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/km5n94csamzvzmu3jr2bp/MAT_143_Section_1_1.pdf?rlkey=dm6j5xiy6c16rqmrrp4835f25&dl=0) worksheet.
   * Start working on Section 1.1 homework in WebAssign.
   * Complete the [Pre-assessment](https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_8HfqGrZvz6Nyo6O?Q_CHL=gl&RID=CGC_1waqEWthUDuzH2v&_g_=g) if you have not already done so.
   * No quiz this Friday.

 * 8/25/25
   * Complete the [Pre-assessment](https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_8HfqGrZvz6Nyo6O?Q_CHL=gl&RID=CGC_1waqEWthUDuzH2v&_g_=g). It will take about 10 minutes. Note that the instructor does not have access to the results to the assessment, only a list of students who have completed the assessment.
   * Preview [Section 1.1](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/km5n94csamzvzmu3jr2bp/MAT_143_Section_1_1.pdf?rlkey=dm6j5xiy6c16rqmrrp4835f25&dl=0) and complete as many questions as you can.
   * Print a [copy](https://files.xiaopv.com/learninggoalsbusmath.pdf) of the learning goals to record your learning progress.
   * [Enroll](https://www.getenrolled.com/?courseKey=utica01170089) yourself (using your Utica University email) to the WileyPLUS homework platform.
   * Complete the introduction [survey](https://xiaopv.com/teaching/2025-fall-mat143) if you have not done so.


## An Important Course Policy

I pride myself on having a good environment for working and learning. It is very important to me that we all treat each other with care and respect, in equal measure. I know that I ask students to take risks in class almost every day, and this can be challenging for many. I ask that you help me keep our classroom a supportive place for each of the people in it. Each of us deserves the space to bring our full, authentic selves to class and be comfortable. (Adapted from [T.J. Hitchman](https://sites.uni.edu/theron/about/).)

## General Course Information and Policies

 * Course name: MAT 143 Mathematical Analysis for Business and Economics

 * Course credit hours: 3 credit

 * Course Prerequisite: MAT 100, or satisfactory performance in the math placement test administered by the math department.

 * Class time and location: Hubbard Hall 210, Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, 8:30am - 9:20am (Section A), 9:30am - 10:20am (Section B)

 * Textbook: Mathematical Applications for the Management, Life, and Social Sciences, 12th Edition by Ronald J. Harshbarger, James J. Reynolds, Rosemary Karr, Marilyn Massey.
 
 * Online homework system: We will use the WebAssign online homework system designed for our textbook. You do not need to purchase the hard copy of the textbook and you will have the access to an electronic version of it after you have signed up the WebAssign access. The ISBN for the WebAssign standalone access card 9780357865095. If you have enrolled in the book bundle program, then you will automatically have access to it. Otherwise, you can purchase the access directly from the publisher. Note that it is very unlikely that any used textbook will come with the WebAssign access. You can click [this](https://www.getenrolled.com/?courseKey=utica01170089) to self-enroll or use the class key "utica 0117 0089". Please use your Utica University official name and email address to register. Do not use nickname or your personal email address.

 * Calculator: We will be using a free graphing calculator app called Desmos. You can use Desmos directly by going to their website at [www.desmos.com](https://www.desmos.com/calculator). You are strongly encouraged to use Desmos on a computer or on a tablet. You can download Desmos at [Apple](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/desmos-graphing-calculator/id653517540?mt=8) or [Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.desmos.calculator&amp;hl=en").

 * Course description: We will discuss various elementary functions and their applications in business. We will also cover linear programming as well as mathematics of finance.

 * Class organization: This course will likely be different from any other math course you have taken before. As an instructor, I will not be lecturing most of the time although I love lecturing very much. Scientific research shows that most people do not learn mathematics by listening, instead, they learn by doing it! I am sure you have said to yourself before "It looked so easy when the professor was doing it, but now I am confused when I have to do it by myself." Why? Because the knowledge belongs to your professor and does not belong to you. You do not learn the knowledge simply by hearing it once or twice from somebody else. In order for you to have a more thorough understanding of the knowledge, we will use a pedagogical practice called [inquiry-based learning](http://www.inquirybasedlearning.org). Most of the time during the class, students will be working in groups and sharing solutions that they have produced by themselves and not by other people or textbooks. 

 * Attendance is mandatory. Attending class meetings will have a direct impact on your learning as well as your grade. If you miss class for any reason, you are responsible for getting the information from a classmate, and checking the course web page for any handouts and assignments. You will not be able to make up the quiz for the day if you were not in class unless you have met the makeup policy below.

 * Makeup policy: You can only make up a quiz or an exam if all three conditions are met:
   * You have a legitimate reason (as determined by me) with documented proof. Visit of emergency rooms due to urgent health conditions is an example of legitimate reason. Attending non-academic events, such as someone's wedding is an example of non-legitimate reason.
   * You have informed me well in advanced.
   * You can only make up the quiz or the exam after the scheduled date.
 
## Your Role and My Role
 
 * Professor Xiao's role: I want you to succeed and I am here to help you succeed, but I cannot succeed for you! I have designed the structure of the course to help you learn. The class format will challenge you but it will be exhilarating and even fun at times. I will do what I think is the best to help you understand the material in the course.
 
 * Student's Role:
   * You are responsible for making sense of the concepts and processes in this course. Success in mathematics is less about "ability" and more about willingness to think and to work hard to make sense of things.
   * Attend every class meeting, participate whenever you can and work on the assignments outside of class.
   * Please respect the ideas and opinions of others.
   * If you are having trouble, please make an appointment to visit me.
   * Cell phones should be off or set to vibrate. Do not place a call or send a text during class, and do not answer a phone call without first leaving the room.

## Intellectual Property

 * My lectures and course materials, including powerpoint presentations, tests, outlines, and similar materials, are protected by U.S. copyright law and by Utica University policy. I am the exclusive owner of the copyright in those materials I create. You may take notes and make copies of course materials for your own use. You may also share those materials with another student who is registered and enrolled in this course.

 * You may not reproduce, distribute or display (post/upload) lecture notes or recordings or course materials in any other way — whether or not a fee is charged — without my express written consent. You also may not allow others to do so. If you do so, you may be subject to student conduct proceedings under the Utica University Student Code of Conduct.

 * Similarly, you own the copyright in your original work. If I am interested in posting your solution on the course web site, I will ask for your written permission.

<!-- “This content is protected and may not be shared, uploaded or distributed.” © Faculty Name 2020 -->

## Course Learning Goals
 1. I can solve linear equation in one variable.
 2. I can perform basic operations such as sum, difference, product, quotient, and composition of functions.
 3. I can find the linear equation given necessary conditions.
 4. I can solve a system of linear equations.
 5. I can use the quadratic formula to solve a quadratic equation.
 6. I can determine the vertex of a parabola given a quadratic equation, and determine the equation of a quadratic function give its graph.
 7. I can find the average rate of change of a function.
 8. I can solve system of linear inequalities in two varaibles.
 9. I can solve an exponential equation.
 10. I can solve a logarithmic equation.
 11. I can model a situation in business and economics context with appropriate linear functions and interpret the solution.
 12. I can model a situation in business and economics context with appropriate quadratic functions and interpret the solution.
 13. I can model a situation in business and economics context with appropriate exponential functions and interpret the solution.
 14. I can model a situation in business and economics context with appropriate logarithmic functions and interpret the solution.
 15. I can use linear programming method to find the optimal value of a linear function subject to constraints in business and economics context.
 16. I can find simple interests when given enough relevant information and interpret the solution.
 17. I can find compound interests when given enough relevant information and interpret the solution.
 18. I can find the future values of annuities and use it to solve related application problem, and interpret the solution.
 19. I can find the present values of annuities and use it to solve related application problem, and interpret the solution.
 20. I can find the regular payments required to amortize a debt and the amount that can borrowed for a specified payment, as well as developing an amortization schedule.


 You are strongly encouraged to download and print a [copy](https://files.xiaopv.com/learninggoalsbusmath.pdf) of the learning goals to record your grade.

## Homework

 Homework assignments come in two different formats. 
  
  * The first kind is online homework assignment at WebAssign. There will be one WebAssign homework for each section. To earn credit, you must earn more than 90% on each assignment. You have 5 attempts for each question and that should be plenty before you can answer the question correctly. Each assignment is worth 1 point. 
  
  * The second kind is completing problems in the course materials assigned every week. You will be working on these assignments during the class time and discuss them with your peers.

## Group Participation

During the class, you will be actively working in a small group with your peer classmates. Here are a few tips on how to be a productive group member:
* Be helpful when your peer has a question. Also don't hesitate to ask if you have a question. The best way to learn something is to teach it.
* It is common that the class time is not enough for you to complete all the activities, so it would be a good idea to get together with your group members between classes to work on them.
* Respect others' idea. Give everyone a chance to share their opinion. Do not dominate a conversation.

## Quizzes and Examinations

  There will be a quiz every week on Friday except for the first week. There will be one cumulative final exam.
 
## Evaluation

 In this class, we will use a system known as standards-based grading. You will have multiple opportunities to demonstrate that you have met a goal. A goal is met if a student has successfully demonstrated it twice in quizzes or final exam. There is no partial credit. Once you have score a goal from a quiz, you should put a note in one of the boxes before the relevant goal on [this](https://files.xiaopv.com/learninggoalsbusmath.pdf) print out. You should use clear labeling to indicate when you score that goal, for example, Q2 stands for Quiz 2. If you are unsuccessful on a quiz problem, prepare yourself to do better on the next quiz. Feel free to stop by my office and ask for practice problems. Quizzes are scheduled on Fridays. The goals that will be tested on a quiz will be posted at this page on Thursdays. Doing problems and participating discussion in class, doing homework and exercises are all ways to help you prepare for the next quiz. All of goals appear on multiple quizzes so you have multiple chance to demonstrate that you have met the goals. Your final letter grade will be determined based on the following criteria.

 | Letter Grade |    Criteria                                         | 
 | ------------ | --------------------------------------------------- | 
 |      A       | at least 19 goals, and at least 18 homework points  | 
 |      A-      | at least 18 goals, and at least 17 homework points  | 
 |      B+      | at least 17 goals, and at least 16 homework points  | 
 |      B       | at least 16 goals, and at least 15 homework points  | 
 |      B-      | at least 15 goals, and at least 14 homework points  | 
 |      C+      | at least 14 goals, and at least 13 homework points  | 
 |      C       | at least 13 goals, and at least 12 homework points  | 
 |      C-      | at least 12 goals, and at least 11 homework points  | 
 |      D+      | at least 11 goals, and at least 10 homework points  | 
 |      D       | at least 10 goals, and at least 9 homework points  | 
 |      F       | less than 10 goals, or less than 9 homework points |
 
## Tentative Schedule

 | Chapter 1 | Week 1-3 |
 | Chapter 2 | Week 4-5 |
 | Chapter 4 | Week 6-7 |
 | Chapter 5 | Week 8-10 |
 | Chapter 6 | Week 11-14 |

## Tutoring Services
 
There are two kinds of (free) tutoring services offered by the university.

* The first kind is the tutoring service at the learning commons of library. Please visit the learning commons for detail schedules.

* The second kind is an online tutoring service provided by the university called ThinkingStorm. You can access the service [here](https://www.utica.edu/thinkingstorm) with your university username and password. 

There is a third (also free) option gaining popularity among students: using generative artificial intelligence, such as ChatGPT or Gemini. Here are some examples (by no means exhaustive) of how AI can enhance your learning experience:

 * Ask ChatGPT to create a practice problem for you. Be very specific about the types of problems you're looking for.

 * Ask ChatGPT for a hint if you're stuck on a problem or to provide a complete step-by-step solution.

 * Ask ChatGPT to evaluate your work and check if you've answered correctly.

However, there are ways in which using AI can be harmful and even detrimental to your learning:

 * Asking ChatGPT to do your homework for you (your future employer might just hire ChatGPT instead of you).

 * Using ChatGPT to get answers without truly understanding the material, which will hinder your critical thinking and problem-solving skills.

 * Warning: While ChatGPT can provide quick responses, there is no guarantee of the quality of the information. Accepting everything ChatGPT gives you without critical reflection is like taking advice from a stranger on the street.

If you have ideas on how ChatGPT or other generative AI can help you learn, please don't hesitate to reach out. I'm happy to discuss it with you.

## Academic Integrity

 I have zero tolerance on dishonesty. Any forms of dishonesty such as copying homework or cheating on quizzes and examinations, will result in zero credit for that particular assignment, and will be reported to the Academic Standards Committee. The highest penalty a student can receive is "F for cheating" for the course. There might be additional sanctions by the Academic Standards Committee such as dismissal from the university. See Utica University official [page](https://www.utica.edu/academic/facultyinfo/intellectualdishonesty.cfm) for Academic Honesty for more details.

## Special Accommodation

 The stuff just below is the University approved language, and is a bit... "legalese''.  The point is, if you need accommodations to succeed in this course, talk to me and we can make sure you get what you need. And the social environment of this course is important to me, too. Let’s work together to make a welcoming and affirming space for everyone.

 Any student who has need of special accommodations in this class due to a documented disability should speak with me as soon as possible, preferably within the first two weeks of class. You should also contact Judy Borner, Director of Learning Services in the Academic Support Services Center (315-792-3032 or jcborner@utica.edu ) in order to determine eligibility for services and to receive an accommodation letter. We will work with you to help you in your efforts to master the course content in an effective and appropriate way. See Utica University official [page](https://www.utica.edu/student/development/learning/) for Office of Learning Services.

## Disclaimer

 It is the students' responsibility to keep informed of all announcements, syllabus adjustments, or policy changes during the semester via this web page or via school emails. The author of this syllabus reserves the right to change it with notice at any time during the semester.
